>> Good afternoon and welcome iPhone
View Controller Techniques.
My name is Evan Doll and I work on
iPhone Applications and Frameworks.
How many of you in the audience have
already written an iPhone application?
Most people.
OK, cool. So you're experienced with UIKit and you probably
understand the role of View Controllers in your application.
What I want to show you today is how you
can adopt some really awesome features
in your application without writing a ton of code.
And you're probably going to be interested as
well to hear about some additions and improvements
to the View Controller classes in iPhone OS 3.0.
Now, if you're just getting started
writing up an application,
there's going to be a lot for you-- here for you as well.
We want to make sure you get started
with a solid foundation.
You understand the role of View Controllers in your app, and
we also want to show you some techniques that you can use
when it's time to take your application to the next level.
So what are we going to cover today?
We're going to start with the quick
overview of View Controllers.
So regardless of your level of experience,
if you're a beginner or an expert,
there's going to be something for
you here, so stay tuned in.
After that, we're going to cover five new
features of View Controllers in iPhone OS 3.0.
These additions are going to help you solve
some common problems and really, you know,
add a level of shine to your application.
And finally, we're going to talk about
best practices, carrying on a little bit
from the previous session on iPhone
Application Architecture.
I'm going to show you some things to avoid, some
things to do, and basically, avoiding unsupported usage
so that you can keep your application working well
with minimum of headaches on future iPhone OS releases.
So let's get started with, you know,
a quick overview of View Controllers;
where they fit in your app and what they do for you.
I want to make sure again that we're on the
same page before we get into the new cool stuff.
This stuff is pretty cool, too, but not as cool or new.
[Laughter] So let's start with the sort of high
level picture of the design of iPhone applications.
And Alex talked about this a little bit in the last session.
But if you think about it, you know, the applications
that you've used on the iPhone, both first party
or third party applications, they tend
to be made up of multiple screens,
and each of these screens has a distinct role,
tries to do, you know, one or few things well,
and has been connected to other screens
in your application using one of a couple
of common application flows or application design patterns.
So if you look here, you know, the Recipes App
is our favorite poster child in terms of demos.
And here, an enthusiastic, over-enthusiastic UI designer
has tried to cram the entire app into one screen.
It's a little bit overwhelming for the user.
And really, what we want is something more like this,
where at the top level, we've got a list of recipes,
and as we drill down, you select the recipe, you can
view the details of the recipe, you select the picture,
and you can view the picture in greater detail.
So in this way, you know, you're not trying fit a bunch of
stuff onto this small screen, and your app is approachable
and understandable by your user because it
matches the design of other apps on the iPhone.
So we've got this new sort of ideas
about design in our heads.
The next step is to figure out how to
tie each of these screens together.
And the idea here is that controllers
play a pretty central role.
And there are two ways that I could think about
the role controller's play in your application.
The first is as a connector between the model and the view.
You've seen probably a million model view controller
diagrams this week, you know, we've been, we were always,
you know, pounding the pavement with that message.
But really, you know, controllers help to
mediate between model and view objects.
They allow you to populate your views with data.
And when changes need to be communicated back to your
model, they facilitate that as well, and analyze your model
and your view to be much more reusable,
maintainable, all that good buzzword happy stuff.
The second role is that controllers
are typically the objects
where you're going to implement your application logic.
So, decisions about how to respond to different
types of user actions like button presses,
table row selections, shaking the phone, anything like that.
But your controllers are typically going to be
the starting point for your application logic.
So really, think about controllers
as the brains of your application.
Hope there aren't any zombies in the audience.
So from there, what do we need?
We need a starting point for our controllers.
There's a lot of common things that controllers
need to do in almost every application.
The first thing is loading a view from
an Interface Builder file, from a NIB,
and sort of being responsible for
managing the contents of that NIB.
So that's a really common need.
Another really common thing is responding
to appearing and disappearing on the screen.
You may want to prepare some data for display, you know,
start loading some data from the
Internet or from a database.
And when you disappear, that's often a
good time to save data or it'd be to clear
out some state that you don't want hanging around.
There are a couple of other things which are common,
elements that are common to iPhone applications
such as presenting modal content and interface rotation.
The controllers are a good place for that too.
So as we were working on-- this is some applications
at Apple, you know, Mail and iPod and all that stuff,
we wanted a starting point for our controller logic.
So we came up for the class called the UIViewController.
You've probably seen this slide before.
You know, UIViewController is the basic
building block of your application logic.
It's responsible for managing a screen full of content.
And typically, you'll subclass UIViewController
for each screenful in your application.
And then that view controller will sort of tie together
the data and the views that are going on in that screen.
And that's all well and good.
You've got a single view controller
managing a single slice of your application.
But what you really want to do is tie these things
together, connect them to build an application.
And there are a couple ways of doing that.
There are these container view controllers which you can
use to plug individual view controller subclasses together.
The first one, which you may be
familiar with, is UINavigationController.
And it manages a stack of view controllers
presenting a hierarchy of data to the user.
The second one is UITabBarController.
And UITabBarController also manages multiple view
controllers but it's different from an app controller.
These view controllers are parallel.
They're separate.
Each of them kind of has their own
little world in your application.
So, we're going to take a brief look at some key aspects
of the Navigation and Tab Bar Controllers, real quick,
and then after that, a couple of other things we're going
to get into the new and cool stuff in iPhone OS 3.0.
So with the Navigation Controller, as I mentioned, your
users can be drilling down into a hierarchy of data.
And the key operations here are pushing and popping.
That's what allows you to move around
within the stack, transitioning views in
and out, and keeping the Navigation Bar in sync.
And if there's only one method that you're
familiar with on UINavigationController,
that method should be pushViewController animated.
That's going to be the method that you call in response
to button presses or table row selections in order
to transition a new view onto the screen as
you drill down into the hierarchy of data.
So as you see here, we select a table row, we go down
another level, we do it again, view the details per person,
we can pop that by hitting the "Back" button.
So in that case, it's actually pretty rare
that you will call popViewController directly.
It's something that typically happens
automatically as a result of the "Back" button press.
Pushing is what you're really going to be responsible for.
So that's UINavigationController.
The other class that I want to
mention is UITabBarController,
and it has several separate self-contained modes, and
each of these modes is represented by a view controller.
The tab bar down at the bottom of the screen is updated to
match each of these view controllers that it's managing.
And the user is going to tap the tab bar
to initiate a switch between these modes.
So typically, what's going to happen, you're
going to set up your Tab Bar Controller.
You're going to give it an array of view controllers.
And from there, you just kind of let it do its own thing.
The user is going to tap the tab bar.
It will switch between different modes.
It's rare.
It's possible, but it's rare that you're going
to, you know, programatically change the selection
in the Tab Bar Controller, except for a situation
like application launch or something like that.
One really common goal in many applications, many
of the most full featured complex apps out there,
like the iPod App, the Youtube App, the App Store or Music
Store, is to combine a tab bar at the bottom of the screen
with navigation at the top of the screen.
This is a really common thing you
want to do in an iPhone app.
And the way this is going to work is that your
top level view controller is a Tab Bar Controller.
This is the one whose view you add to the window.
And from there, the Tab Bar Controller
you know, has multiple children,
some of those children may be UINavigationControllers.
So each of those Navigation Controllers in turn,
can have its own separate stack of view controllers.
So these stacks are distinct, and the user can
toggle between these different navigation stacks
by pressing the tab bar at the bottom of
the screen; so that's how that sort of,
is put together in a complex application.
Finally, the last you know, overview topic that I want
to cover is presenting modal content in you application.
And the situation where you're going to want to do
this is when your user needs to add some new data
or pick from some existing data
that's already in their application.
And the key with modal content is
that it covers the entire screen.
The user is in this mode and needs to either,
you know, add or pick the data or maybe cancel
out of it before they get back to
the main flow of your application.
So here's an example in the Clock App, when we want to
add a new alarm, you hit the "+" button up at the top
of the screen, and a view controller is presented modally.
It takes it to full screen, it goes away when you hit the
"Cancel" button and you're back in the main flow of the app.
Similarly, in the text messaging application,
you can hit that "Compose" button at the top
to show a new message composition and we're going to
present an additional mode of view controller on top of that
for picking someone from your address book.
So we call presentModalViewController once, we call
it again, and then we dismiss them one after another,
get back to the original state of the application.
>> Now, Modal View Controllers are a great way to
display some other functionality into your application
when we expose a few view controllers that are
ready for you to present in your application.
The first one which you are probably
familiar with is the image picker.
This is how you integrate with the user's
photo album and a camera in your iPhone app.
The second ready to present view controller
you may have used as well is the people picker,
and it allows you to select a contact from your address
book and integrate that into the application somehow.
Now on iPhone OS 3.0, there are a couple of new ready to
present view controllers that you can use in your app.
The first one is the mail compose view controller.
So now on iPhone OS 3.0, you don't need to have
the user exit your application to send an email.
It can all happen in your process.
They can compose the message, they can send it, and
they don't have to leave your app, which is really cool.
A second ready to present view controller on this new
in iPhone OS 3.0, there's actually a session going
on about it right now as you'd see, you should definitely
check out the video, alright, is the media picker.
This allows you to get you know, your user's
playlists and albums and songs into your app
to use them in cool, interesting, unforeseen ways.
So presenting modal content is really key.
You're actually going to see some example of
presenting modal content later in today's talk.
If you want to know more about view controllers,
if this is a little fast for you 'cause,
you know, we're just kind of covering the basis.
First, I encourage you to check out WWDC 2008 on iTunes.
There are a couple of sessions.
In particular, they cover this
in really, really great depth,
"Understanding View Controllers"
and "Mastering View Controllers".
I believe this is still available for download.
Also, just a little bit of shameless self-promotion,
the iPhone Application Programming Course at Stanford,
all the videos, lecture slides, assignments, handouts.
It's all online.
It's all free.
You can download it.
Check it out and produce at your leisure.
And finally, tomorrow morning, 9 to 11:45 AM in
iPhone Lab A is the iPhone View Controllers Lab.
So if you have specific questions about using view
controllers in your application or some use case
that we didn't expect, in order to figure
out how to make it work, come and talk to us.
I'm going to be there, a bunch of other UIKit engineers
will be there, and we can get your questions answered.
So at this point, let's get in to the good stuff.
We'll talk about some new features in iPhone OS 3.0.
And as I mentioned, there's 5 features we're going to
cover: Contextual toolbars, flipping in your application,
mixing interface orientations, alternate
landscape UI, and full screen layout.
So let's start with contextual toolbars.
The idea with contextual toolbars is that, you know,
the iPhone, it doesn't have a menu bar up at the top
of the screen, and the next best place to put sort
of contextual actions the user may want to perform
on what they're currently viewing is in
a toolbar at the bottom of the screen.
And you've seen this well used
in the Mail App on the iPhone.
As you navigate through the Mail App, the contents
of the toolbar at the bottom of the screen change.
If I were to go one additional level in here, you'd
see how we get a bunch of controls for deleting
and transferring your message, all that sort of stuff.
And so in our Recipes Application,
we want to have something similar.
At this top of the recipe list, we've got a couple controls.
We want to change the sorter or maybe view settings for
the application or view this handy-dandy utensils view.
Or when we view the details for a recipe, watch
here at the bottom of the screen as it changes.
We select the recipe and the toolbar items change.
This is really common.
A lot of apps want to do this.
And we wanted to make it dead simple
for you to adopt in your application.
So how do we do this?
The key now is that navigation controllers
may optionally choose to display a toolbar.
It appears at the bottom of the
screen and the content of, you know,
the area where the top view controller
is displayed is automatically resized
to accommodate the toolbar at the bottom.
So we've got a toolbar, where did
the toolbar items come from?
The second edition is that each view
controller can have an array of toolbar items.
So you would allocate and you would set an array of items
on each view controller and then as navigation occurs,
the toolbar is going to be automatically
updated to match where you are.
So the key here is that you don't need to access the toolbar
directly and say, you know, set the items, you can just,
you know, set them on the view
controllers, and it will be automatically--
the toolbar will be automatically updated to match.
One thing worth mentioning here is
that the hidesBottomBarWhenPushed property is
respected for toolbars as well as tab bars.
You've probably been using hidesBottomBarWhenPushed in
situations like the iPod Application where the tab bar is
at the bottom of the screen but then it
slides out when you're viewing Now Playing.
So you set hidesBottomBarWhenPushed to Yes on the view
controller which we'd like to hide that bottom bar.
And this works just as well for toolbars if there's
a situation, and we'll see it on some of movies here
where we want the toolbar to just
go away and animate out correctly.
So let's-- oh, that brings me to a very good
point which is toolbars versus tab bars.
What's the difference?
You know, they have pretty similar names, and actually
in the very, very first data version of the SDK,
they were the same class which is kind of crazy.
But toolbars are really all about performing actions,
and they use momentary highlighting
to indicate what you've pressed.
But then, once you take your finger
off, the highlighting goes away.
Tab bars are all about indicating modes.
They stay highlighted, the highlighting
is persistent, and really,
when the user presses on a tab
bar item they expect a mode change
but they don't expect a lot of
other stuff to happen, alright.
It can be very disconcerting and confusing
to the user if they tap on the tab bar item
and some other stuff happens in your app.
So that will be one sort of recommendation in
terms of how to use toolbars versus tab bars.
You know, toolbars are for actions, tab bars are for modes.
Another thing worth mentioning is that your
application may have, you know, one or the other,
but I'm hard pressed to think of it of a situation
where you'd want both, a contextual toolbar
and a tab bar at the bottom of the screen.
First of all, that's going to be
taking up a big chunk of space.
And second, I don't know, I just can't think
of any apps where that would make sense.
But who knows, maybe.
My recommendation would be choose one or the other.
So let's look at how we actually use a contextual toolbar
with some code sample and a little bit of you know,
eye candy to really drive the point down.
So right now, we've got a navigationController, it's
been added, its view has been added to the window,
and right now, there's no toolbar anywhere.
And what we really want is for a toolbar to show
up in that space at the bottom of the screen.
So the first thing we do, there's a property on
UINavigationController, toolbarHidden, it defaults to "Yes,"
and kind of you know, inverse negative,
toolbarHidden set to "No" which shows the toolbar.
And when we do this, you'll see the toolbar
magically materializes at the bottom of the screen.
So we've got the toolbar now.
We want to populate it with some content.
And as I mentioned, we're not going to access
the toolbar and set these items directly.
What we really want to do is set the items on the view
controller, in this case, the recipe list view controller.
So I create this array of items, and I'm going to set it on
the recipe list view controller and by virtue of doing that,
the toolbar is automatically updated to match.
And then finally, we want some different items
when reviewing the details for our recipe, right?
So we're getting the recipe detailedViewController
ready to display.
We're going to set its toolbar items
to some array of different items.
And then when we push the view controller, you'll
notice without accessing the toolbar directly,
the toolbar updates to show the new items.
So that's how you use contextual
toolbars in your application.
The key here, first of all, is that each view
controller may have its own list of toolbar items
and the navigation controller will
automatically update the toolbar to stay
in sync with where your users navigate it to.
And again, don't confuse tab bars and toolbars.
There's a big difference.
And if you, you know, use one when you should be using
the other, it can be very confusing for your user.
So those are contextual toolbars.
The next topic that I want to cover
is flipping in your application.
So, you've seen this in a lot of places.
The Stocks Application uses flipping, you know, very well,
you can tap that little button at the bottom of the screen,
flip over, change some things around, go
back to the main flow of the application.
So a flip UI is a really convenient way to present some sort
of auxiliary views, settings, something that is an essential
to the core application flow, but
it sort of tangentially related.
So we wanted to make this really, really
easy for you to do in your application.
There was some sample code for this on iPhone OS
2.X. The issue there was that it involved a sort
of intermediate view controller that contained
both the front and the back side view controllers.
There's about a little bit more heavyweight than
it should have been given how commonly people want
to do this in their applications.
So we want to make it really easy.
And if you think about it, you know, this act of
flipping you application here in the Recipes App,
you hit the Settings button, go to some settings,
hit the Done button, go back to the main screen.
It's a lot like presenting a modal view controller, right?
Your user is in this mode, they need to, you know,
finish the settings and then hit the Done button,
and then they go back to the main flow of their application.
So what we decided to do was actually
extend modally presented view controllers
to include different presentation styles.
So if you look in UIViewController.h or in the
documentation, there are now three modal transition styles
that you can use when presenting and dismissing modally.
The first one is the default, you've been using it, you
know, since iPhone OS 2.0, it's the Cover Vertical style
which will cause a view controller to come up from the
bottom of the screen and go away in the same direction.
And there are two new styles, the
Horizontal Flip and the Cross Dissolve.
We're going to be talking about the
Cross Dissolve a little bit later.
For now, let's focus on the Horizontal Flip.
>> So in addition to defining these
styles, we added a new property
to UIViewController which is the modalTransitionStyle.
This is per view controller.
This is a setting that you set on the
view controller that will be presented.
So here's how you use them.
You first set the modalTransitionStyle, as I mentioned,
on the view controller that's going to be presented.
So in this case, I would set it
on the settings view controller
in the Recipes App, not the one on the front side.
It's unique to every view controller
that is to be presented.
And then I just call the regular presentModalViewController
animated, dismissModalViewController animated,
and that modalTransitionStyle will be respected.
So let's take a look at how this
actually works in the Recipes Application.
I don't believe the sample code
is on the attendee's site yet,
but it will be up there pretty
shortly for you to mess around with.
So here's the Recipes App again.
We've got the toolbar at the bottom.
We've got that Settings buttons and we want that Settings
button to flip over to the settings for the Recipes App.
So the first step as we're preparing the setting view
controller here referred to as the backViewController,
we're going to set the modalTransitionStyle,
and this is something that persists.
You set it once on the view controller and that
will last through the presentation, dismissal.
If you present it again, you just need to
set it one time on your view controller.
So as we set that, we'll then call the regular
presentModalViewController animated method.
And here, we're pressing "Yes" for
the animation property, of course.
And what this will do when the
user hits that Settings button,
we're going to flip over to the
back side of the application.
And now, when we want to go back to the main application
flow, we don't' need to set the modalTransitionStyle again,
we just call dismissModalViewControllerAnimated and
we'll go back to the main flow of the application.
Pardon me for a second.
[Applause] Yeah, yeah, right.
So, yeah, you know, this used to be
pretty complicated on iPhone OS 2.0.
There was a lot of code.
There was a lot of boilerplate code you had to bring in
from a template to get this working in your application.
Now, it's easy to integrate anywhere.
It's, you know, just a couple lines of code.
You set the modalTransitionStyle
and you present and dismiss.
Yeah, so that's something we got a lot of
feedback about and we want to make it easier.
This next topic, we probably got even more feedback
about and it's mixing interface orientations
in your view controller-based application.
Ton of feedback about this, this is heavily, heavily
requested, and we wanted to make it work for some
of the most commonly requested use cases.
And there are two cases that we're most interested in.
And the first one is a case of modally presented content.
As you can see, we're going back to modally
presented view controllers a lot today.
So back at the main screen, you'll notice this
little utensils toolbar item down in the lower left.
And when we tap this, we want to show just, you know, just
in case you forgot what utensils you had in your covered,
remind you what you've got, and this is a landscape view.
There are a lot of other applications where the
main flow of the application is in portrait,
but then there's some modal view control
that you want to present its landscape only.
So this wasn't really supported on iPhone OS 2.0.
All of your view controllers had to support pretty
much the same set of interface orientations.
Otherwise your-- the behavior was kind of unexpected.
But now, if we tap on this utensils button, you'll notice
that we present this thing in landscape, and the tool--
this set of part at the top of the
screen updates itself automatically.
We're going to do this in slow
motion, don't worry if you blinked
and missed it, I promise there was no sleight of hand.
So if we hit "Done" now, we're going to return
to the main flow of our application in portrait.
The Status Bar is back to the portrait
orientation and everything is as it was before.
The other case is within the navigation stack.
So this was another common request.
A lot of applications want to have portrait view controller,
portrait view controller, portrait view controller,
and then some leaf node which is rotatable.
You may have seen this in Mail on iPhone OS 2.0 where
Mail was not rotatable except for the attachment view.
You could rotate attachments and then hit the
"Back" button from there and you would be restored
into portrait in the main flow of your application.
So if you check it out here, we're viewing the photo
detail for a recipe and this view is rotatable.
The previous one in the stack is not rotatable.
So when this-- we rotate here, the automatic
interface rotation occurs automatically
and we hit the "Back" button, and we're back in portrait.
So it was kind of a crazy transition.
I'll do it again.
Well, there's that one.
Go back to portrait here.
You rotate, hit the "Back" button, it's back in portrait.
So how do we do this?
The key here is, well first of all, mixed interface
orientations are now supported in two situations:
Presenting modally, and within a navigation stack.
And the key here is
to implement -shouldAutorotateToInterfaceOrientation:
in the expected manner.
And the key is to return YES for
the orientations that you support.
This is a way to indicate to the view controller
presentation machinery what orientations are okay
for this view controller and which ones are not supported.
And you really want your implementation here to be simple.
And if you find yourself writing a ton of code
in shouldAutorotateToInterfaceOrientation,
and you're checking with the five or six
other objects, "Hey, should I rotate?
Should I not?"
and you're checking maybe even your own current interface
orientation, that may be not exactly what we're expecting
out of shouldAutorotateToInterfaceOrientation.
So we want to keep it simple and we want to
keep it about design time, not run time logic.
So let's take a look at a couple example
implementations of shouldAutorotateToInterfaceOrientation.
So the first example is a portrait-only view controller.
And this is actually the default implementation right here.
So we're only returning YES here if the proposed interface
orientation is portrait; so simple stuff, portrait only.
Another example of view controller
is one that's landscape-only,
like the utensils view controller
that we were looking at before.
So here, we're only returning YES if
the interface orientation is landscape.
Sorry, if I was standing in front of that.
If we wanted to support both portrait and landscape,
you might have an implementation
where you order these two together.
So that's like the photo detail view
controller that we were looking at previously.
So let's look now at how we actually
mix these interface orientations.
So here in the case with the utensils view, the recipe list
view controller only supports portrait, it's not rotatable.
And then the utensils view controller
supports landscape orientations.
It returns YES for landscape left and landscape right.
So when we call presentModalViewController here with the
utensils as utensils view controller as our argument,
you'll notice the status bar automatically
moves over, the view comes up in landscape,
and then the user can rotate their photo to look
at this incredibly compelling content in landscape.
When they dismiss they hit the "Done" button, the status
bar automatically updates and then back in portrait.
You'll notice here, there's really no any new API.
It's just supported via the existing
shouldAutorotateToInterfaceOrientation method.
There's no secret sauce you need to set up, just implement
shouldAutorotateToInterfaceOrientation and it works.
So as I mentioned, the other case
is within the navigation stack.
And I should be, maybe a little bit more specific here.
What we now support is a case where you've
got a portrait-only navigation stack
and tell your leaf note and that one is rotatable.
So all of a sudden, you're in landscape with this leaf node
whether it's, you know, a photo or an email attachment,
whatever, and you want to pop back
to something that's portrait-only.
And that's the case specifically that we now support.
We got a lot of request for this, and
every single person who has asked for it,
that was the case that they were trying to do.
So here, the photo view controller supports
both portrait and landscape orientations.
The previous view controller in
the stack, the recipe detail view,
for whatever reason, we've decided
it only supports portrait.
So as long as we indicate our support
via the shouldAutorotate implementations,
when we hit the Back button here after rotating
the landscape, of course, you'll notice this kind
of crazy transition where everything slides out vertically
and the previous view comes in already in portrait.
So that's that.
No new API.
It indicates supported orientations via
-shouldAutorotateToInterfaceOrientation,
and this is new to iPhone OS 3.0.
Next stop.
[ Applause ]
>> Next stop is alternate landscape UI and
this is another heavily requested thing.
And actually, what we're going to see here is this actually
combines two of the last topics we've just talked about;
mixing interface orientations and
using custom modal transition styles.
In this case, the Cross Dissolve modal transition style.
So you've all seen the iPod application, and you know
that when you're browsing around in these table views,
when you rotate the phone, you all of a sudden
go to this different mode, the tab bar goes away,
the navigation bar goes away, and you're in
this totally, totally different, you know,
sort of optional additional mode for the application.
And we got a lot of API requests actually, requesting things
like, you know, "I want to be able to hide the tab bar
in this particular area or I want to
be able to fadeout the navigation bar".
And it turns out a lot of those
requests were actually asking for this,
they wanted to present an alternate
landscape UI in their application.
So we want to make this easy for
you in your application as well.
If-- folks out there who have done it, I know their Quicken
app does a great job presenting an alternate landscape UI.
Hopefully those folks can, you know, delete
a bunch of code and do things the easier way
after all their hard work has gone noticed by users.
>> So here when we rotate the phone out of
the recipe list, or the recipe detail view,
we want to show a little card view, you know, browsing
through your card book of recipes, I don't know,
probably like cover flow, they kind of matches.
So how do we do this?
As I mentioned, we're going to
use mixed interface orientations
in the context of presenting modal view controller.
So we've got two view controller; the one that's
underneath is in portrait, and the one that we're going
to be presenting, the card view, is landscape-only.
And the next step is to observe UIDevice
orientation change notifications.
So this is a case where we don't want to opt
into the standard interface autorotation stuff
because that's really geared toward a single
view that remains on screen as we're rotating
from portrait to landscape or vice versa.
That single view changes shape, maybe animates itself
a little bit, but that's not what we want here.
We want to show an entirely different view.
So, we're going to observe this UIDevice
orientation change notifications.
And when we hear about a rotation to landscape,
we're gonna present the card view controller.
And when we rotate back to portrait, we're
going to dismiss that card view controller.
And we're going to do it all using the modalTransitionStyle,
the CrossDissolve modalTransitionStyle.
And we're going to see, there we go, alright.
So this is again leveraging a couple of things that
we've already talked about in the presentation today.
So, starting with the recipe card view controller, our
implementation of shouldAutorotateToInterfaceOrientation,
we just returned YES for either
landscape left or landscape right.
You'll also notice that the status bar
up at the top of the screen is black.
So we want to enforce that as well
in our viewWillAppear method.
After we call the super-- the super implementation,
we're going to set the status bar style
on the application to the black opaque style.
Conversely and view will disappear, we're going
to set the status bar style back to default.
Now let's assume that the main UI bar
application uses the default status bar style.
If we really wanted to be super clever here, we'll probably,
you know, save away the original style in viewWillAppear
and then restore it in viewWillDisappear
but that didn't quite fit on the slide.
So I just kind of assumed that we're in
default in the main flow of the application.
So that's the card view.
Now, the second step as I mentioned was to listen
to UIDevice orientation change notifications.
And we do this first.
Let's say that we're going to take this
all off in our application delegate.
In our applicationDidFinishLaunching method maybe
we want to begin observing this notification.
So the notification is
UIDeviceOrientationDidChangeNotification.
And so anytime the device orientation changes,
it's going to invoke this method on us,
on the app delegate called deviceOrientationDidChange.
Let's look at the implementation of that method.
So here we go, deviceOrientationDidChange.
And the first thing we're going to do
is get the current device orientation.
We're then going to perform a few checks to
figure out if this is an appropriate time
to show the landscape card view controller.
So we first check, see whether the
orientation is landscape or not.
If that's true, we also want to check and make sure we don't
have a different modal view controller already presented.
And the third check we want to make for
the case of the Recipes Application,
because the recipe photo view is
rotatable, we don't want to show
that in the cover flow view when
you're viewing the recipe view.
So we check whether the top view controller handles
landscape or not, and if it doesn't do landscape,
then it's going to need appropriate
for us to show that card view.
So, if all these conditions evaluate to YES, we're
going to get our card view controller, ready to go,
and we're going to set the modalTransitionStyle
on it to CrossDissolve modalTransitionStyle.
And then just as we've done, you know, a bunch
of times already today and however many times
in your application, presentModalViewController animated.
So that would cause the application to
fade into this cover flow-esque mode.
It's-- maybe card flow is the right word for it
when the user rotates the device to landscape.
So now we need to implement the other half of that
method, of the deviceOrientationDidChange method.
So here we go.
And the other half the if-- of the if statement.
If the orientation is portrait and our currently
presented modalViewController is the cardViewController,
so this is just a kind of simple check here
to make sure it actually has been presented.
Then, we're going to dismiss that modalViewController.
We call dismissModalViewControllerAnimated, we want
YES animation, so it'll just cross dissolve out.
And because mixed interface orientations are supported
with modally presented view controllers, this just works.
So if we go back here, we rotate
the device back to portrait,
we're going to fade back to the main UI in our application.
So hopefully this should make it really easy for you
to adopt an alternate landscape UI in your application.
Hopefully it's not too insane or gratuitous
but I look forward to checking it out.
Yeah.
[ Applause ]
>> Alright, so that was alternate landscape UIs.
We used view controllers here.
We present and dismiss modally
in response to device rotation,
and we used one of this new modal transitions styles.
Finally, the last new feature that I
want to cover is full screen layout.
And the idea here is that in the Photos Application,
for example, when the user is viewing a photo,
they can scale that thing up and it can occupy the entire
screen including the area underneath the navigation bar,
underneath the status bar, even at the top of the screen.
A lot of people want to this when they've got
really compelling especially user-generated content
that they want to just fill the entire screen with.
So we wanted to support this as well in the Recipes App.
As you might expect, now when you view a recipe photo,
you'll notice that recipe photo content can fill
up the entire screen including
the area under the status bar.
So I'm going to show you how to do this.
The first step is to cause the
navigation bar to overlap your content.
And this is actually something that
has been supported since iPhone OS 2.X,
what you do is you make your navigation bar translucent.
And if you're in the context of a navigation controller
and you set its navigation bar to be translucent,
the content will automatically be positioned
in the space underneath the navigation bar.
To be more specific, this has always worked if
your top view controller's view is a scroll view,
and it's worked since iPhone OS 2.0.
And we extended this to work for all views for
application that are linked on or after iPhone OS 2.2.
So if you're working with iPhone OS 2.2
or later, any view should be positioned
in the area underneath the navigation
bar if the navigation bar is translucent.
But the next step that's a little bit more complicated
is getting the status bar to overlap our content as well.
By default, content just does not
appear underneath the status bar.
And people tried some ways of making this work on iPhone
OS 2.X and some of them worked, and some sort of worked,
and then they broke, and all that sort of stuff.
I'm going to show you the fully espoused supported
way for you to do this in your application.
To overlap the status bar with your content in a navigation
or tab bar based app or even when they combines nav bars
and tab bars, you first want to make sure that your window
and the containing view controller
are sized to the full screen.
So this means when you create your window, if you create
in code, maybe you're creating your NIB, in which case,
it should already be sized to the full screen size, you're
going to use the value of UIScreen mainScreen bounds,
if you're not turning any area off the
top of the screen for the status bar.
The same thing goes for your containing view controller.
So in this case of the Recipes App, when
we size this view controller to start with,
we don't want it to be the application
frame, we want it to be the full screen,
we want it to take up the full area of the window.
The navigation bar and tab bar,
no, sorry, navigation controller
and tab bar controller are both intelligent enough
to position their content in such a way that if it,
how should I say this, navigation controller,
you might worry that the navigation bar is going
to overlap the status bar now at the top of the screen.
But the navigation controller actually
handles that for you automatically.
The navigation bar is shifted down by the height
of the status bar even if it's full screen.
And then the key here to indicate
to the containing view controller
that it should actually size its
content using the full screen is
to set this property wantsFullScreenLayout
to YES on your view controller.
So in the case of the Recipes Application, we're going to
set that property to YES on the recipes photoViewController.
Now, important to mention here is that the
status bar style change is still up to you.
So, after you've, you know, you've got this full
screen window, full screen navigation controller,
one of your view controllers in the
stack has wantsFullScreenLayout YES,
you still need to call the UI application
method to update the status bar style.
So, kind of a lot of stuff here.
Let's look at some code and hopefully that
will help to illustrate what's going on.
So here's the full screen aspect.
When we're creating our window, we're
sizing it, we're calling it with frame,
we're going to call UIScreen mainScreen bounds
to get the frame that we're using for the window.
Again, if you're using Interface Builder, you might
just want to check out your mainwindow.zib and check it
out but it should already be full screen.
So we call initWithFrame and we use that fullScreenFrame.
And then the key here and this is probably
different from how you're doing it right now
in you iPhone OS 2.X-based app is let's say our
top-level view controller is a navigation controller.
>> To correctly work with full screen layout, we want
the navigation controller's frame to also be full screen.
In this case, on the iPhone, it's 320 x 480.
So don't use UIScreen mainScreen application frame
here, just use the bounds of your full screen window.
Next, we're getting our photoViewController ready to
display, and we want it to be positioned under both,
you know, the navigation bar and the status bar.
And to indicate that it should go under the status
bar as well, we set wantsFullScreenLayout to YES,
just a simple Boolean property, set it
and forget it, whatever, it's good to go.
And then we're going to push that view controller.
The last thing to do is ensure that we
update the bar styles to match here.
We're going to update the application
StatusBarStyle to the BlackTranslucent style
so that the content showing through,
you know, so you can see it.
Additionally, we're going to set the
navigationController.navigationBar,
we're going to set up a couple of properties
here, the bar style is just purely for looks,
so we want that cool BlackTranslucent navigation bar
when we're viewing the recipe photo
just like in a Photos App on the phone.
But the key here is setting the translucent
property on the navigation bar to YES.
And that will cause-- that's the
other domino that used to fall
for the navigation controller will size its top
view controller's content to fit the full screen.
Then when we're popping, we need
to revert this stuff, you know.
And again here, this assumes that the bar style on the
status bar and the navigation bar both the default style,
you might want to do something more intelligent like
cashing the original bar style and then restoring it.
But the key here is that we need to restore
both the application status bar style
and the navigationController.navigationBar.translucent
property and then we'll be back exactly
where we were before we viewed this full screen view.
So, picture is worth a thousand words, we're going
to go ahead and select this photo here, go in.
You'll notice that the navigation bar and the
status bar both update as we go in when we push.
And we can then zoom in.
You'll see that that content really is full screen.
When we hit the Back button, navigation bar reverts to its
old appearance and the status bar does its thing as well.
So now you can integrate this in your application
in a fully supported way that we'll continue to work
on future iPhone software releases which is always nice.
[ Applause ]
>> So what did we just see?
There's a few things to keep in mind here
when you want to do full screen layout.
First of all, again, ensure the window and the
containing view controllers are full sized.
Set the wantsFullScreenLayout property to
YES on the view controller to be displayed.
Use the translucent bar styles on
the navigation bar and the status bar
and then restore the original bar
styles when you're going away.
So that covers our little selection
of new features in iPhone OS 3.0.
Hope you all adopt them in your applications.
Yeah, you don't have to write a ton of code
to get some pretty cool visual effects.
And now I want to talk about some best practices,
and it's not talked about earlier in
the application architecture talk.
And you've probably been hearing elsewhere at
the conference, there's somethings you need to do
that will really help the robustness of your application
and ensure that you avoid some potential headaches
in the future with, you know, iPhone software
releases down the road in the foreseeable future.
And the first topic that I'd like to
mention is respecting the view hierarchy.
What does this mean exactly?
There are some system views that have their own
internal view hierarchies that are not documented.
These internal view hierarchies are only subject to change.
And it's kind of the whole point
of abstraction and encapsulations.
It's something like the navigation bar.
We expose UINavigationBar, you can use it in
all different places, but the actual contents
of UINavigationBar are not documented
either in API or in the docs.
So making assumptions about what
it contains can be dangerous.
The same goes for navigation and tab bar controllers.
Each of these controllers have a set of views
and making assumption about what's contained
within these views can be very dangerous.
Finally, some of the other view controllers the
ready to present view controllers like the camera,
the address book, all that sort of stuff.
You really want to avoid making potentially
dangerous assumptions about what's in those views.
So in particular, what I would ask you to
avoid doing, both for your benefit and mine,
is to avoid manipulating the subviews
of any of these opaque system views.
Also, adding your own subviews is probably something
that may work under particular circumstances.
You can always make assumptions about
how that might change in the future.
So if you find yourself in your code doing
something like walking up the superview hierarchy,
and then walking down into some subviews, subview
object in the next 3 subviews, object in the next 2,
and then do a little bit of stuff and hey, it works,
chip it, it might not be the best thing to do.
So I would really encourage you, in this case, to try
working with the system frameworks, not against them.
The full screen layout, example, is one example of this.
We weren't able to support that well in iPhone OS 3.0.
A lot of folks kind of handled their own solutions to it.
We now have a better way for you to do it that will
continue to work on future iPhone software releases.
If there are cases where you're finding yourself needing to
dig around in view hierarchies, you know, do what you will,
but I first beg you to file a bug at bugreport@apple.com
and request the behavior that we haven't yet exposed to you.
The more we hear your feedback, the
more we can make intelligent decisions
about what API are worth focusing on
on future iPhone software releases.
The next topic I wanted to mention
is container view controllers.
And container view controllers are things like
navigation controllers, tab bar controllers,
and those two in particular are really designed
from the get-go to contain other view controllers.
And if you find yourself writing your own code which,
you know, writing your own container view controller,
you might want to just pause for a second and ask
yourself if it's really what you intend to do.
It's, I don't want to say that it's not something you
should do period, there's, you know some example code
that we've published which does this, which has one
view controller which contains another view controller.
You just need to make sure that there are
certain methods which you will need to pass
from the containing view controller to the contained
view controller to ensure that it works properly
and we don't necessarily have the facilities
to fully support that as API right now.
One example of this where you can now switch over to some
public API is for flipping and crossfading view controllers.
So you can use the modal transition styles
now, present the view controller modally,
and you won't need to have this wrapper view
controller that maybe contains a bunch of other ones.
So, a bit of advice.
Next, I want to talk a little bit
about navigation bar appearance.
What's going on here when you're
using a UINavigationController?
Obviously, when you're just using a
navigation bar by itself in your application,
you can do, you know, whatever you want with it.
You can size it.
You can position it, all that sort of stuff.
But when you're using a UINavigationController,
the navigation controller owns the navigation bar.
There are certain properties which are OK for
you to manipulate, and there are properties
which are actually pretty dangerous for
you to make assumptions about or change.
So, properties that are OK to change include bar style,
obviously, the tint color, even the translucency.
Some properties which are dangerous to
manipulate include the frame and the hidden value.
So really I mean the navigation controller because it's
responsible for sizing and positioning the navigation bar
in an intelligent way and sizing and positioning other views
relative to that navigation bar, if you go in under the hood
and move around navigation bar, you might
start to see some unexpected behavior.
So you'll notice I called that hidden here.
A lot of people want to hide the navigation bar.
What's the best supported way to do
this with a navigation controller?
I would encourage you to check
out the -setNavigationBarHidden:animated:
method on UINavigationController.
And this method has actually been
beefed up a lot on iPhone OS 3.0
and now supports animating horizontally
during pushes and pops.
So if you want to, you know, hide or show the
navigation bar while you're pushing and popping it,
have that navigation bar go with the incoming or outgoing
view controller, you can call setNavigationBarHidden:YES
or NO animated:YES from within your
viewWillAppear or viewWillDisappear method
and you should get the right behavior there
in terms of the navigation bar appearance.
So let's say that maybe on the top level of
our Recipes Application, the recipes list,
we don't want to display the navigation bar right up the
bat, we want to use the full available screen real estate
and we want to just, you know, fill
it all up with our list of recipes.
But then when we view a recipe, we want that
navigation bar to come in, because otherwise,
you won't be able to navigate it back, right?
So what we'll do here, this is actually the implementation
of viewWillAppear for the recipe list view controller.
So we call super and then we call
self.navigationController, setNavigationBarHidden:Yes
and we pass along the animated flag that we've got.
The implementation of the next view controller, the recipe
detail view controller, would be similar to this except
that you're passing NO for NavigationBarHidden.
You could also implement this in
viewWillDisappear instead on the recipe list.
So if we have that in place, we then select the recipe,
and we call setNavigationBarHidden:NO animated:YES
as it's appearing, and the navigation
bar will come in from the right side
of the screen looking just like you would expect it to.
>> You can navigate back, the navigation bar will
again hide itself and you're back at the root
of your application since navigation bar.
So you'll notice this is one of a few bits
of new functionality that I've been covering.
Well, there isn't necessary new API for
it, so it's not going to jump out at you
if you're just browsing through the header.
The documentation does mention it, but you know,
keep in mind that we've added some subtle changes
to the view controller classes in iPhone OS 3.0.
Mixing interface orientations is
another great example of this.
One additional topic that I want to mention is that
of Interface Builder and view controller integration.
So a lot of people ask, when should I use interface builder?
I mean some view controllers maybe make
sense, maybe it doesn't make sense.
What's the rule of thumb for most applications?
And I would say really it's almost always recommended to
use Interface Builder in tandem with your view controllers.
It's especially useful if you got
a really complex view hierarchy.
You've got some containing view and it's got a bunch
of labels and text fields and other sort of, you know,
views in there that need custom positioning 'cause
it's really painful to lay that stuff out in code,
get the centering and the sizing, all that stuff right.
Interface Builder makes it easy to verify
that, you know, what you see is what you get.
The one case where Interface Builder is maybe
not as useful in some iPhone applications is
if your view controller's view is just a table view, right?
Because the appearance of the table view isn't
really customizable in Interface Builder,
it's defined by the table view data source and delegate.
So in that case, it might not make
sense for you to use Interface Builder.
Actually, that's what the UITableViewController
view controller subclass is designed for.
It's just simply UIs where you got a
table view filling up the whole screen.
This is a good time to mention also the
idea of one view controller per NIB.
So in an application with many screens and
many view controllers managing those screens,
you'll often have multiple NIBs and each NIB will be owned
by a view controller subclass, and they'll make connections
between the view controller and elements of that NIB via
the File's Owner, this little translucent orange box,
which is a sort of a proxy for the
object which is loading the NIB.
Anytime you create a view controller, using init
with NIB name and bundle, specify the NIB name.
What that does really is later cause the NIB to be
loaded with the view controller as the File's Owner.
So you can make connections between the view
controller and the view or anything else
in the NIB via the File's Owner property.
As far as NIBs and memory management go, there are 3
topics I'd like to mention here that are worth knowing.
The first is that top-level nib objects are autoreleased.
This behavior is different from what
you might be used to on Mac OS X.
So any top-level nib objects, and by top-level nib
objects, I mean any of these objects which you may drag
out into the main window, the main sort of
top level UI of your NIB Interface Builder.
Any of those objects you might drag out are going
to be autoreleased after the nib has been loaded.
So if you want to keep them around, you need to retain them.
And the most common way to do this is via IBOutlets
where you can drag your connection from the File's Owner
or from some other object to these top-level
objects, and that will cause them to stick around.
Second related topic is that an IBOutlet
without a setter is just setting directly
into an instance variable will be retained by default.
And this behavior again is different from
what you might be used to on Mac OS X.
So the tricky thing here is that you may have a case
where you've got an IBOutlet on an instance variable.
You don't have a setter defined.
You don't have a setter method implemented.
You don't have a property.
You don't have synthesized property.
You don't-- you're not retaining this thing anywhere,
but you still need to release it in your -dealloc method.
The reason is actually because in
the absence of a setter method,
it will go through this standard
sister method called setValueForKey.
And setValueForKey will retain its
argument as it's setting the value.
So really for the best clarity here, you're
going to want to declare a property or just,
you know, implement your own setter method.
In that way, it's really obvious to you the fact
that you've retained this object in a setter method
or in a synthesized property with the
retained attribute, it's then really obvious
that this thing needs to be released
in your -dealloc method.
Finally, and Alex mentioned this in the previous talk
on iPhone App Architecture, there's this new method
on UIViewController which a lot
of people ask for -viewDidUnload.
So in the case where you get a memory warning, and your view
controller's view will probably be released but not always
because in some situations that it's being displayed in
its top view controller and navigation stack, for example,
we don't want to throw that view controller's view away.
And it was tricky before iPhone OS 3.0 to know
when exactly your view had been dropped
and when the view was still around.
So there's a new method -viewDidUnload which
is a good place for you to empty out to release
and set to nil any IBOutlets especially if you've got
a view controller with the view and that has, you know,
several subviews, and maybe you've
got IBOutlets to those subviews,
this is the place to release and nil out those IBOutlets.
Another method which is actually isn't here on the
slides but is good to know about as well, is -viewLoaded,
which you can call on a view controller and sort of
non-distractibly say, "Hey, is your view loaded or not?"
Because calling viewControllerView
will always return the view.
If the view has been unloaded as the result to the
memory warning, calling viewControllerView will cause it
to be reloaded which is kind of a counterproductive
thing to do if you just got memory warning.
So these are some useful hints for Interface Builder
integration with view controllers in your app.
So that just about does it.
In summary, I'd first like to encourage you to
build your application using view controllers.
They include a lot of built-in functionality for really
common, you know, paradigms in iPhone applications.
We use them in our system apps.
We're moving-- almost all of our system
applications, use view controllers.
We're living on them just like you are and we'd
encourage you to use view controllers in your app.
In iPhone OS 3.0, we've gotten a lot of feedback for our
developers about what's important and what was missing
from the view controller then we tried to add that in there.
So in addition to, you know, fixing, you know,
filling holes, there's a lot of cool new functionality
that you can adopt in your application
without needing to roll it all by yourself.
You know, we want you to spend time on the aspects of
your application which are truly unique and interesting.
We, you know, you're time is limited.
We don't want you to waste time reinventing
the wheel doing a cover flow view.
And finally, you know, follow best practices.
It's going to save you a lot of headaches down the road.
And again, let you focus on, you know, doing
cool stuff in your application and not worry
about whether some bit of code might break in the future.
For more information, Matt Drance is of course your
constant companion out there in the evangelism world.
The Documentation is getting updated everyday.
We're adding more and more view controller
content, working on a lot of great stuff there,
and the View Controller's Lab, which I mentioned previously
on the talk, tomorrow morning, iPhone Lab A, I think.
If it's not iPhone Lab A, just
look around for me and tackle me.
That'll be going on from 9 a.m. to noon.
Don't actually tackle me.
That's it.